Add scrollElement to collection renderers (#6806)
ariakit/ariakit: .changeset/200-select-renderer-scroll-element.md

---
"@ariakit/react-components": patch
---

Explicit scroll elements for collection renderers

Added the `scrollElement` prop to collection renderers, including `CompositeRenderer` and `SelectRenderer`. This prop can be an element, a React ref, or a function that resolves the element whose viewport controls rendering.

Use this prop when the scrolling ancestor cannot be detected automatically, such as when an `overflow: auto` element does not overflow until asynchronous items are loaded:

```tsx
const scrollElementRef = useRef<HTMLDivElement>(null);

<div ref={scrollElementRef} className="scroller">
  <SelectRenderer scrollElement={scrollElementRef} items={items}>
    {(item) => <SelectItem key={item.id} {...item} />}
  </SelectRenderer>
</div>;
```

> Nested renderers using the same store inherit an explicitly provided scroll element unless they provide their own. When the prop is omitted, each renderer detects its closest scrolling ancestor. Thanks to [@ItaiYosephi](https://github.com/ItaiYosephi) for reporting the issue.

Author: **[P2] Credit all material issue contributions on the required surfaces**

This final sentence credits only the report and keeps the credit in the behavior paragraph. Issue #3913 also includes a video, a StackBlitz reproduction, and the explicit-scroller prop proposal that shaped this API and its regression coverage. Ariakit's multi-paragraph changeset format requires a standalone final credit paragraph describing those material contributions, and the PR description also requires a matching `## Acknowledgments` section.

For example:

```md
Thanks to [@ItaiYosephi](https://github.com/ItaiYosephi) for reporting the issue, providing the reproduction, and proposing an explicit scroller prop.
```

Please use that as the final standalone changeset paragraph and add the same precise acknowledgment to the PR description.

- Severity: **Low** (verified against issue #3913 and the current PR body), because this affects release metadata and contributor recognition rather than runtime behavior.
- Priority: **P2** (estimate, 95% confidence), because the required acknowledgment surfaces should be complete before merge.
- Breakage likelihood: **Likely** (verified), because the current changeset and PR body deterministically omit these contributions/surfaces if merged as-is.
- Fix effort: **Easy** (estimate, 99% confidence), because this only requires small Markdown edits.

<!-- ariakit-pr-review review_id=pr-6806-5c985d1571d7acd122166bfa35b878fd1aceb0c1-20260722T212119Z head_sha=5c985d1571d7acd122166bfa35b878fd1aceb0c1 -->

Author: Fixed in [`fcd62902c`](https://github.com/ariakit/ariakit/commit/fcd62902cfd971102ae38c3fdee365460a15661f).

The changeset now ends with a standalone credit paragraph recognizing @ItaiYosephi's report, video, StackBlitz reproduction, and explicit scroll-element proposal. I added the same precise credit under `## Acknowledgments` in the PR description.

---
"@ariakit/react-components": patch
---

Explicit scroll elements for collection renderers

> Added the `scrollElement` prop to collection renderers, including `CompositeRenderer` and `SelectRenderer`. This prop can be an element, a React ref, or a function that resolves the element whose viewport controls rendering.

Author: [P2] Include the `null` behavior in the release contract

The accepted-input sentence reads as exhaustive, but it omits literal `null`; the type and JSDoc define that value as disabling viewport-driven rendering. A consumer scanning the generated changelog for a way to pause viewport work could conclude that only an element, ref, or resolver is supported. This is also detailed prose in a multi-paragraph changeset, so it should use present tense.

```suggestion
Collection renderers, including `CompositeRenderer` and `SelectRenderer`, now accept a `scrollElement` prop. It accepts an element, a React ref, a resolver function, or `null` to disable viewport-driven rendering.
```

**Assessment**

- Severity: Low (estimate, 95% confidence), because runtime behavior is correct but the shipped release contract is incomplete.
- Priority: P2 (estimate, 95% confidence), because this should be corrected before the entry becomes changelog output.
- Breakage likelihood: Unlikely (estimate, 90% confidence), because it only affects consumers relying on the release entry to discover the opt-out.
- Fix effort: Easy (verified by the one-line replacement above).

<!-- ariakit-pr-review review_id=pr-6806-fcd62902cfd971102ae38c3fdee365460a15661f-20260722T224608Z head_sha=fcd62902cfd971102ae38c3fdee365460a15661f -->

Author: Fixed in [`ea148ce47`](https://github.com/ariakit/ariakit/commit/ea148ce47a830e915735b45c711f071f163cbd03): the multi-paragraph changeset now uses present tense and lists literal `null` alongside elements, refs, and resolver functions, explicitly stating that it disables viewport-driven rendering.

The wording matches the current TypeScript and JSDoc contract. `pnpm lint-fix`, `git diff --check`, and the required exact-snapshot reviewer gate all pass.
